8th Imperishable: Vigour.(p. 45)

Then the venerable Śāradvatīputra addressed himself to the bodhisattva Akṣayamati: – Well spoken by you, son of good fami
ly, was this imperishability of the bodhisattvas’ tolerance. May you be inspired, son of good family, on the subject of 
the imperishability of the bodhisattvas’ vigour, as to how the vigour of the bodhisattvas becomes imperishable.

[1. The variety of vigour (vīryaprabheda):] Akṣayamati said: – These eight, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are the bodhisattvas
’ assumptions of vigour. Which eight? They are: 1) Imperishable armour; 2) imperishable courage; 3) imperishable attainm
ent; 4) imperishable maturation of beings; 5) imperishable accumulation of merit; 6) imperishable accumulation of knowle
dge; 7) imperishable accumulation of insight; 8) imperishable accumulation in the attainment of all the Buddha-qualities
.

1) What then, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is the bodhisattva’s imperishable armour?

Not exhausted by existence, he does not seek awakening by counting aeons, thinking: “For so many aeons I will put on armo
ur, for so many aeons I will not put on armour,” but he puts on an inconceivable armour, thinking: “Even if the period f
rom the beginning of existence1 were like the time of one night and day, and even if I were to produce a single thought 
of awakening and see a single Tathāgata, worthy of offerings and fully awakened, in a half month of fifteen days of that
kind of night and day, in a month of thirty such days, in a year of twelve months, or even in, by calculating the years
in this way, a hundred thousand years; and even if I were to know the mental behaviour of one being by producing so man
y thoughts of awakening and by seeing so many Tathāgatas as the river Gaṅgā has grains of sand, according to that kind o
f calculation, that computation, then I will know the mental behaviour of all sentient beings, each and every one of the
m, through producing that many thoughts of awakening and seeing that many Tathāgatas according to that calculation and t
hat computation.” This is the armour without fatigue.

“I will, according to this same calculation, this same computation, serve so many Tathāgatas as the river Gaṅgā has grain
s of sand to fulfil the perfection of generosity; I will, according to this same calculation, this same computation, ser
ve so many Tathāgatas as the river Gaṅgā has grains of sand to fulfil the perfection of morality; and, in the same way, 
I will, according to this same calculation, this same computation, serve so many Tathāgatas as the river Gaṅgā has grain
s of sand to fulfil the perfections of tolerance, vigour, meditation and insight; (p. 46) in the same way, I will, accor
ding to this same calculation, this same computation, serve so many Tathāgatas as the river Gaṅgā has grains of sand to 
fulfil all the moments of existence that are wings of awakening, to fulfill all the characteristics and marks of beauty,
to fulfil all the powers, intrepidities and special qualities of a Buddha pertaining to a Tathāgata; I will, according 
to this same calculation, this same computation, by means of seeing so many Tathāgatas as the river Gaṅgā has grains of 
sand, by those productions of thoughts of awakening bring about one characteristic of a great man; I will, by this proce
dure bring about the accomplishment of all the characteristics and marks of beauty.” This armour without fatigue is the 
bodhisattvas’ imperishable armour.

2) What then is the bodhisattva’s imperishable courage?

[1. How it is (yathā):] Making himself enter the system of threefold thousand great thousand worlds, even when it is fill
ed up with fire,[2. and for what (yadartham):] in the effort to see the Tathāgata, is the bodhisattva’s imperishable cou
rage;the bodhisattva’s courage is the effort to hear religion;the bodhisattva’s courage is the effort to bring beings to
maturity;the bodhisattva’s courage is the effort for the sake of all moments of existence that are roots of the good;th
e bodhisattva’s courage is the effort for the sake of the knowledge that is omniscience.[3. Explanation of the word (nir
ukti):] The bodhisattva’s courage is called courage since he enters into the world for the benefit of others,[to appease
their vices (kleśapraśamanāya), to discipline their abilities (indriya) and for the sake of the complete extinction of 
all of existence (sarvasaṃsāraparinirvāṇāya), entering the system of threefold thousand great thousand worlds even when 
it is filled up with fire], it is called courage since he is entering into the world to give peace to others, to discipl
ine others, for the sake of others’ complete extinction;[4. the essence of that vigour (tasya vīrasya svabhāvaḥ), 5. its
cause (hetu) and 6. action (karma):] it is called courage since it is entering into the world always intent on the good
of living beings [its action (karma) ], being established in great compassion [the cause (hetu) ] stemming from good in
tentions, never loose, never narrow, firm and never turning back [the essence (svabhāva) ].

[Including both 7. insight and 8. expedient means (prajñopāyaparigṛhīta):] Everywhere when going, putting the foot down, 
raising the foot, he makes the thought of awakening present, and though he has regard for living beings [which is expedi
ent means (upāya) ] he does not fall to the side of vices [which is insight (prajñā) ]; this is the bodhisattva’s imperi
shable courage.

3) What then is the bodhisattva’s imperishable attainment?

The transformation of all good thoughts, as they arise, into awakening is the bodhisattva’s imperishable attainment. Why?
Because they have been transformed into awakening.

There is, namely, no destruction or interruption whatsoever in between, until he is sitting in the place of awakening, of
the roots of good transformed into awakening. Just as, reverend Śāradvatīputra, there is no destruction or interruption
in between, until the end of the aeon, of a drop of water fallen into the great ocean, in exactly the same way there is
no destruction or interruption whatsoever in between of roots of good transformed into awakening, until he is sitting i
n the place of awakening.

It is called attainment because it is bringing together in the proper way,(p. 47) and the roots of good he attains settin
g out on the way he transforms so as to protect all beings, bring all beings to maturity, introduce all beings to the ro
ots of good.[Why does he transform that way?] Those roots of good he transforms to realize the knowledge of omniscience.
[What will he do having transformed thus?] Those roots of good he transforms to nourish all beings;those roots of good h
e transforms to establish all beings in complete extinction, in the knowledge of omniscience.That is the bodhisattva’s i
mperishable attainment.

4) What then is the bodhisattva’s imperishable maturing of living beings [or, rather, what is the imperishable vigour (vī
rya) in maturing living beings]?

The sphere of living beings is immeasurable, but the bodhisattva should relate to it by this way of calculating: “If I in
one day could bring to maturity all the beings included in a system of threefold thousand great thousand worlds, and in
this way could mature spheres of living beings for innumerable, countless, unthinkable numbers of aeons, could mature i
nnumerable spheres of living beings for such a long time, countless spheres for such a long time, unthinkable numbers fo
r such a long time, even after I had done this, I would not have matured even one hundredth part of all living beings, e
ven one thousandth part, even one hundredthousandth part, even one millionth part, even one ten-millionth part, even one
billionth part, even one ten-billionth part, even any number, even any part, even any counting, even any example, even 
any comparison,” if the bodhisattva, having heard such a statement, does not get frightened, alarmed or scared, he shoul
d be known as a bodhisattva who has exexerted himself with vigour. This is the bodhisattva’s imperishable maturing of li
ving beings.

5) What then is the bodhisattva’s imperishable accumulation of merit [or, rather, what is the imperishable vigour (vīrya)
in accumulating merit]?

The bodhisattva’s merit is immeasurable, and the bodhisattva should apply this sort of calculation to it: “So much as is 
the merit of all beings, of all disciples, both those to be trained and those having completed their training, and isola
ted buddhas of the past, present and future, by all this merit multiplied by a hundred one pore of the Tathāgata’s body 
is accomplished; in the same way, so much as is the mass of merit pertaining to all the pores multiplied by a hundred, b
y that one mass of attained unhindered merit one mark of beauty on the Tathāgata’s body is accomplished; in the same way
all the marks of beauty are accomplished one by one; in the same way, so much as is the mass of merit pertaining to all
the marks of beauty multiplied by a thousand, by that one mass of attained unhindered merit one characteristic of a gre
at man is accomplished; in the same way the thirty-two characteristics of a great man are accomplished one by one on the
body; and so much as is the mass of merit pertaining to the mark on the forehead, by that the attained mass of merit mu
ltiplied by a hundred thousand the characteristic of a great man which is the invisible crown of the head is accomplishe
d on the body of the Tathāgata; (p. 47) and that mass of merit pertaining to the crown, by that mass of attained merit m
ultiplied by a thousand billions or even more the Tathāgata’s conch of religion is accomplished,and by means of that con
ch of religion the Tathāgata makes a sound in worlds without end and without limit as he wishes, and pleases the senses 
of all beings according to their faith in and intentions concerned with religion and discipline,” if, having heard this 
way into the bodhisattva’s accumulation of merit, he does not get frightened, alarmed or scared, then this is the bodhis
attva’s imperishable accumulation of merit.

6) What then is the bodhisattva’s imperishable accumulation of knowledge [or, rather, what is the imperishable vigour (vī
rya) in accumulating knowledge]?

The bodhisattva’s accumulation of knowledge is immeasurable, and the bodhisattva should apply this sort of calculation to
it: “If all beings in the system of threefold thousand great thousand worlds all had the knowledge of a faith-follower,
their knowledge would not amount even to one hundreth part of that of one having the knowledge of a follower of the tea
ching, it would not amount to one thousandth part, hundred thousandth part, ten millionth part, billionth, ten billionth
, thousand billionth part, any number, any part, any example, even any comparison.Thus also with those having knowledge 
in accordance with religion compared with one with the knowledge of the eighth stage,those with the knowledge of the eig
hth stage compared with one with the knowledge of one who has entered the stream,those with the knowledge of one who has
entered the stream compared with one with the knowledge of the one returning only once,those with the knowledge of one 
returning only once compared with one with the knowledge of one never returning,those with the knowledge of one never re
turning compared with one with the knowledge of an arhat,those with the knowledge of an arhat compared with one with the
knowledge of an isolated buddha,[the knowledge of] those with the knowledge of an isolated buddha does not amount to on
e hundredth part of the [knowledge] of one with the knowledge of a bodhisattva, perfected through a hundred aeons,it wou
ld not amount to even any example, any comparison; those with the knowledge of a bodhisattva perfected through a hundred
aeons compared with one with the knowledge of of a bodhisattva who has attained tolerance,those with the knowledge of a
bodhisattva who has attained tolerance compared with one with the knowledge of a bodhisattva who never turns back,[the 
knowledge of] those with the knowledge of a bodhisattva who never turns back does not amount to a hundredth part of [the
knowledge of] a bodhisattva hindered by only one birth,it would not amount to any example, any comparison; even if the 
beings in this system of threefold thousand great thousand worlds had the knowledge of a bodhisattva hindered by only on
e birth, it would not amount to even one hundredth part of the knowledge of a bodhisattva sitting in the place of awaken
ing,it would not amount even to any example, any comparison; even if the beings in the endless systems of threefold thou
sand great thousand worlds (p. 49) had the knowledge of a bodhisattva sitting in the place of awakening, it would not am
ount even to one hundredth part of the Tathāgata’s power of knowledge of the possible and impossible,it would not amount
even to any example, any comparison,” such is the bodhisattva’s gradual accomplishment of all the powers, intrepidities
and eighteen special qualities of a Buddha, and when the bodhisattva, having heard this way into the accumulation of me
rit, does not get frightened, alarmed or scared, then this is the bodhisattva’s imperishable accumulation of knowledge.

7) What then is the bodhisattva’s imperishable accumulation of insight [or, rather, what is the imperishable vigour (vīry
a) in accumulating insight]?

The imperishable accumulation of insight is the knowledge of penetrating the mental behaviour of all beings: “Even if the
thoughts of all living beings, past, present and future, were found in one mental effort of one living being, and, in t
his way, even if all living beings were filled with an immense number of such thoughts, even if the cupidity, aversion a
nd bewilderment of all living beings, past, present and future, were all found in one thought of one living being, by th
is order of things, if all living beings were filled with an immense number of such thoughts, in relation to this the bo
dhisattva develops such an accumulation of insight, by means of which accumulation, being accumulated, all productions o
f thought included in the minds of those living beings would be known, each one arisen in connection with its proper obj
ect, then broken up and melted away. And by that insight there would be no absence of knowledge whatsoever concerning th
e manifestations of thoughts and vices in the three times of those living beings.”.

Reverend Śāradvatīputra, just as there is nothing which is not pervaded by space, just so there is no manifestation of th
ought or vice of those living beings which is not illumined and thoroughly known by the insight of that bodhisattva.

This is the bodhisattva’s imperishable accumulation of insight.

8) What then is the imperishable accumulation of the attainment of all Buddha-qualities [or, rather, what is the imperish
able accumulation of vigour (vīrya) in attaining all the Buddha-qualities]?

The imperishable accumulation of attaining all Buddha-qualities is piling up the accumulation of all roots of good, pilin
g up the accumulation of all the perfections, piling up the accumulation of all moments of existence conducive to awaken
ing. Piling up practice with the thought of awakening as the object, from the first production of the thought of awakeni
ng to sitting in the place of awakening, the accumulation of good thoughts by means of which all qualities of a Buddha a
re attained, this is the bodhisattva’s imperishable accumulation of attaining all Buddha-qualities.

These eight, reverend Śāradvatīputra, are the bodhisattvas’ eight assumptions of vigour.

[2. Teaching all the gates of vigour (vīryamukha):] Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, (p. 50) the imperishable vigour of 
bodhisattvas is the basis of the body’s good actions, the basis of speech’s good actions, the basis of mind’s good actio
ns. Why? Because all that is vigour is associated with body, speech and mind.

[3. All vigour is subsumed under vigour in thought (cittavīrya) including insight and expedient means (prajñopāyaparigṛhī
ta):] But vigour in thought is according to tradition superior to vigour in body and speech.

What then is vigour of thought?

Activity of thought [which is expedient means (upāya), under which embarking upon the different practices of the bodhisat
tva is subsumed] and stillness of thought [which is insight (prajñā), completing those practices].

[The divisions (prabheda):] What then is activity of thought? It is undertaking the thought of awakening [from the first 
time on, which is expedient means (upāya) ]. What then is stillness of thought? It is the peacefulness of the thought of
awakening [without any undertaking (anārambha) or effort (anābhoga), which is insight (prajñā) ].

What then is activity? Great compassion for living beings. What then is stillness? Tolerance of ego-lessness.

What then is activity? Bringing living beings together [with the four means (or, “substances”) for bringing them together
(saṃgrahavastu) ]. What then is stillness? Not grasping any moment of existence [in not grasping for substance (vastu) 
in any moment of existence through insight (prajñā) ].

What then is activity? Never getting tired of existence. What then is stillness? Not apprehending the threefold world.

What then is activity? Giving away all belongings. What then is stillness? No conceit because of generosity.

What then is activity? Taking training upon oneself. What then is stillness? No conceit because of training.

What then is activity? Tolerance and endurance. What then is stillness? Invulnerability in thought.

What then is activity? Undertaking all roots of good. What then is stillness? Aloofness of thought [giving up the bad and
construing no undertakings of good].

What then is activity? Attainment of meditation. What then is stillness? Introspection into thought [beyond discursive th
inking (prapañcâtīta) ].

What then is activity? Never getting tired of learning. What then is stillness? Thorough mental effort.

What then is activity? Teaching religion according to tradition. What then is stillness? The inexpressible state of thing
s.

What then is activity? Seeking the accumulation of knowledge. What then is stillness? Complete excision of discursive tho
ught.

What then is activity? Accumulating the pure ways of behaviour. What then is stillness? Equanimity by right knowledge [no
thought-constructions (akalpanā) concerning friendliness (maitrī) and so on towards living beings].

What then is activity? Fulfilling the five supernormal powers. What then is stillness? Cultivating absence of impurity [t
he sixth supernormal power].

What then is activity? Practice of recollection. What then is stillness? No mental effort in recollection [not apprehendi
ng (upalabh-) distinct characteristics (lakṣaṇa) of the body, etc.].

What then is activity? Right exertion and practice. What then is stillness? Giving up good and bad thoughts.

What then is activity? Realizing the bases of magical power. What then is stillness? Effort in effortless action.

What then is activity? Expertness with the senses. What then is stillness? Seeing the moments of existence beyond the sen
ses [the pure sphere of all moments of existence (viśuddhadharmadhātu) ].

(p. 51) What then is activity? Attainment of power. What then is stillness? Uncrushable knowledge.

What then is activity? Attainment of the limbs of awakening. What then is stillness? Knowledge of skill in knowing the wa
y to discern moments of existence.

What then is activity? Seeking the accumulations on the way. What then is stillness? Not going anywhere.

What then is activity? Seeking peaceful meditation. What then is stillness? Thoughts appeased with peaceful meditation.

What then is activity? The practice of expanded vision. What then is stillness? Knowledge of the state of things.

What then is activity? Understanding causes [that is, the causes of impurity (saṃkleśahetu) and ignorance (avidyā), etc.,
and the causes of purity (vyavadānahetu), cessation of ignorance (avidyānirodha), etc.] What then is stillness? Knowled
ge of causes [not apprehending (anupalabh-) them].

What then is activity? Listening to the words of others. What then is stillness? Realizing the moments of existence.

What then is activity? Embellishing the body. What then is stillness? The real nature of the body.

What then is activity? Embellishing speech. What then is stillness? Silence of the saints [giving up the discursiveness (
prapañca) of speech and staying concentrated inside thought].

What then is activity? Confidence in the three gates of freedom. What then is stillness? No action.

What then is activity? Avoiding the four Evil Ones. What then is stillness? Getting rid of all habits of vice, being conn
ections to new births.

[Then, to summarize:] What then is activity? Seeing through expedient means [producing the thought of awakening (bodhicit
totpāda), maturing living beings (sattvaparipāka) and so on]. What then is stillness? Seeing with insight [not apprehend
ing (upalabh-) the thought of awakening, living beings, etc.].

What then is activity? Seeing through undertaking [the practices of a bodhisattva (bodhisattvacaryā) ]. What then is stil
lness? Perseverance [completing this practice].

What then is activity? Seeing the conventions. What then is stillness? Seeing the highest truth [the ineffable (anabhilāp
ya) true state of things (dharmatā) beyond words and conventions (nāmasaṃketātīta) ].

This is called vigour in thought. And the one who is established in all activity to fulfil the imperishability of vigour 
in thought and is far from distinguishing marks, he is established in action through knowledge even though he is engaged
in every action of distinguishing marks, he will make every action into action through knowledge.

What then is the bodhisattva’s action through knowledge?

It is when he does not reject the conditioned – for the sake of the roots of good and for the sake of great compassion fo
r living beings – but he does not fall into the unconditioned, so that he will attain the knowledge of a Buddha.

This is called the bodhisattvas’ imperishable perfection of vigour.

When this imperishable perfection of vigour was taught, seventy-six hundred billion divine and human creatures produced t
he thought of awakening, and thirty-two thousand bodhisattvas attained the tolerance that moments of existence are unbor
n.

