3rd Imperishable: Practice.

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, the bodhisattvas’ practice is imperishable since their intention is imperishable. Why?

[1. Where practice is imperishable (yatra prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention of generosity is the bodhisattva’s imperishabi
lity of practice, while his practice is the appearance that he gives away all he has got;

The intention of moral discipline is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice is the appearance 
of taking upon himself moral discipline, training, the qualities of asceticism and penance;

The intention of tolerance is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice is the appearance of no a
ggressive thoughts towards any being;

The intention of vigour is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his action is the appearance of having al
l roots of good as the basis;

The intention of meditation is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice is the appearance of pur
ification of his meditation;

The intention of insight is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice is the appearance of purifi
cation of what he has learned;

[2. The means by which practice is imperishable (yena prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention of friendliness, compassion, joy a
nd equanimity is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice, while his practice is the appearance of bringing benefit
s and happiness for living beings, of joy and confidence in religion, and of getting rid of aversion and attachment;

[3. Where established practice is imperishable (yatra sthitaḥ prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention concerning the body is the
bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is purifying the threefold vow of bodily deeds;the intention concern
ing speech is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is giving up the four kinds of sin in speech;the in
tention concerning the mind is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is the absence of covetousness, av
ersion and wrong views;

[4. How practice is imperishable (yathā prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention concerning what he has heard [sūtras and so on, 
his learning] is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since he has no teacher’s secrecy concerning religion;

[5. Why practice is imperishable (yasmāt prayogo ’kṣayaḥ):] The intention of no teacher’s secrecy concerning religion is 
the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is the practice of [generating] the thought of omniscience;the in
tention of [generating] the thought of omniscience is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is making o
ther living beings adopt the thought of awakening;the intention of making other living beings adopt the thought of awake
ning is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is bringing [living beings] in touch with the roots of go
od;the intention of practice concerned with the roots of good is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it 
is transforming into awakening;the intention to transform into awakening is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practic
e since it is attaining all the qualities of a Buddha;the intention of attaining all the qualities of a Buddha is the bo
dhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is grasping true religion;grasping true religion is the bodhisattva’s i
mperishable practice since it is admitting one’s wrongdoings;the intention to admit one’s wrongdoings is the bodhisattva
’s imperishability of practice since it is to confess one’s sins;the intention to confess one’s sins is the bodhisattva’
s imperishability of practice since it is to rejoice in all merit;the intention to rejoice in all merit is the bodhisatt
va’s imperishability of practice since it is to collect immeasurable accumulations of merit;the intention to collect imm
easurable accumulations of merit is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is seeking all Buddhas;the in
tention to request [teachings from] all Buddhas is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is supporting 
true religion;the intention to support true religion is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is the de
ed of a good man [that is, of a bodhisattva or Buddha, whose action is to make others adopt true religion];the intention
of the deed of a good man is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is freeing others from their burden
;the intention of freeing others from their burden is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is never to
take off the strong armour [of vigour (vīrya) ];the intention never to take off the strong armour [of vigour (vīrya) ] 
is the bodhisattva’s imperishability of practice since it is carrying out the duties of all beings;

Further, reverend Śāradvatīputra, these four are the bodhisattva’s imperishable practices. What four?

1) The imperishability of practice being the thought of awakening; 2) the imperishability of practice being explanation, 
the gift of religion; 3) the imperishability of practice to bring beings to maturity; 4) the imperishability of practice
to accumulate roots of the good; these are the four imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice which consists in tirelessnes
s in conforming to the qualities of asceticism and penance when living in the wilderness; 2) the imperishability of prac
tice which consists in tirelessness in amassing accumulations of merit and knowledge; 3) the imperishability of practice
which consists in tirelessness in the quest for learning; 4) the imperishability of practice which consists in tireless
ness in knowing how to transform into awakening; these are the four imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice which consists in understandi
ng numbers [writing, calculation and seals (lipigaṇanāmudrādijñānam) ]; 2) the imperishability of practice which consist
s in understanding weights [measures of capacity and weights of gold and silver (droṇakarṣāditulanājñānam) ]; 3) the imp
erishability of practice which consists in understanding examination [of the quality of things like clothes and goods (v
astraratnādijñānam) ]; 4) the imperishability of practice which consists in understanding through inspection [of bodily 
qualities of men, elephants, horses etc. (puruṣahastyaśvādyaṅgamaṇividyādijñānam) ]; these are the four imperishable pra
ctices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice which consists in understandi
ng the cause of impurity; 2) the imperishability of practice which consists in understanding the cause of purity; 3) the
imperishability of practice which consists in proclaiming the cause of impurity; 4) the imperishability of practice whi
ch consists in proclaiming the qualities and advantages of purity; these are four imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice which consists in investigati
ng the parts of personality [as being like an illusion (māyopama) ]; 2) the imperishability of practice which consists i
n investigating the spheres of perception [as being like an empty city (śūnyagrāmopama) ]; 3) the imperishability of pra
ctice which consists in investigating the fields of perception [as being like snake poison (yathāśiviṣa) ]; 4) the imper
ishability of practice which consists in investigating dependent origination [all things arise from causes and condition
s (hetupratyaya) ]; these are four imperishable practices.

Again, there are four imperishable practices. What four? 1) The imperishability of practice which consists in explaining 
that conditions are impermanent; 2) the imperishability of practice which consists in explaining that conditions are suf
fering; 3) the imperishability of practice which consists in explaining that all moments of existence are selfless; 4) t
he imperishability of practice which consist in explaining the enjoyment of peace in extinction; these are four imperish
able practices.

In short, reverend Śāradvatīputra, all the bodhisattva’s practices are inclined towards omniscience, directed towards omn
iscience, and bent upon omniscience. And since omniscience is imperishable [being like open space (ākāśasama) ], therefo
re all the practices of the bodhisattvas are also imperishable.

This, reverend Śāradvatīputra, is called the bodhisattvas’ imperishable practice.

